

Teaching mathematics: the novel vs comic-strip vs the movie

"I'll wait for the movie to come out ..." ??

primarily University teaching ... but only because I don't know for
school teaching 

## Introduction

Most efforts at designing a curriculum, for mathematics as for many
other subjects are, are efforts to linearise (by which we mean simply
to arrange in a linear fashion, not some notion of linear dynamical
systems) a complex web of knowledge.

That is, we aim to provide a linear pathway that when traversed leads
a student from ignorance to blessed understanding of the subject at
hand: calculus, linear algebra or poetry. 

Within that pathway there may be diversions. And above it lies
multiple hierarchical taxonomies of knowledge. Sections or chapters of
the course of study. Underlying a course can be multiple themes
developing in parallel. And a student may participate in multiple
linearised streams in parallel. 

However, the nature of teaching whether it be pushed towards the
student via lectures or workshops, or pulled by the student through
text-book readings is that they approach each step sequentially in
time, and therefore the ideas must be presented in linear sequence.

In reality, as displayed by Wikipedia and other such sources,
knowledge is a complex web. A key part of designing a course is the
translation of this web into a sequence. In mathematics in particular,
a student must learn A in order to learn B, and then C etc, and so it
seems the sequence might be obvious, but in most important cases, the
"dependencies graph" (a directed graph describing what prior concepts
knowledge of X is dependent on) is not simple. Moreover, educationally
speaking, students do not always absorb complex ideas in one sitting,
and hence such ideas needs be revisited, each time increasing the
sophistication of the students' understanding. Thus translating this
web into a linear sequence is a key skill for a curriculum designer,
or the author of a textbook.

If we take as given a sequence of knowledge thus translated, then
there is a subsidiary question a teacher should ask, "how should this
sequence be presented?"

In mathematics, historically, the majority of formal classes were
presented in the form of "chalk and talk". That is, a lecturer stands
at the front of a class and writes mathematics on a board (whether it
be a blackboard or whiteboard is irrelevant) while describing the
mathematics being written. We could argue extensively on the merits or
otherwise of the technical aspects of teaching in this manner (e.g., the
issue of talking while facing away from the audience so as to be able
to write at the same time is important, but not the topic for
today). However, at present there are more fundamental issues being
debated. For instance, there is a strong push towards "active
learning" or the "flipped classroom" motivated by evidence that
teaching outcomes are improved.  

Confusing the issues are debates about learning styles of students,
the many academics who are embedded in the idea of teaching as
they were taught, the complex nature of authority in the classroom,
and the expedience of teaching methods in a world that demands much of
an academics time to be spent outside of the classroom on research and
administration. 

The purpose of this essay, within this complex and evolving space is
to examine a metaphor of teaching styles, and by examining this
metaphor understand more clearly how different teaching methods sit in
within the domains of students' experience. The essay is NOT
pejorative: we make no complaints about any approach, or recommend one
against the other. Such claims should be made through evidential
research on human memory and psychology, and empirical studies in the
classroom. However, it seems clear from the lack of clarity in
existing studies that there is no one-true teaching philosophy to rule
them all. And so within the space of varied teaching approaches, we
should pick and choose approaches that meet the varying needs of the
moment, in much the same manner that good computer programmers choose
a programming language and paradigm suited to the task at hand.

## Sequential presentation of content

Within the linear sequential structure of a traditional curriculum,
there are several approaches to presenting material.

We argue there that a key concept that is overlooked modern debates
about active vs passive learning is the degree of sequentiality in the
presentation and the related issue of pacing of material. 

1. A "chalk and talk" lecture. In such, the material is presented over
   the course of a lecture, the important feature being that material
   is paced by the lecturer. The student has no control over
   pace. Even if the lecture is recorded, a student can only alter the
   pacing via crude mechanisms such as pausing and replaying.
   
2. A "powerpoint" (we use the commonly recognised application
   PowerPoint as a proxy name for the use of slides shown through the
   medium of a computer projector or historically through a slide
   projector, simply for convenience, and do not mean to limit the
   actual technology being used.)  presentation, in which a lecturer
   presents a series of (mostly) still images, and discusses them. The
   "images" are actually primarily words and mathematics, but we label
   them images because they are not (usually) sequential prose
   intended to be read as such, nor (despite many animation effects)
   are they truly dynamic (animations used are often just eye-catchers
   rather than true animations of meaning). 
   
3. A textbook or written notes, which the student is intended to read,
   mostly in order, but with the ability to flip between sections to
   refer to prior concepts. 

4. A "active" course where reading material is suggested for students,
   and they must self-learn the material through these readings and
   their own research, and then present their understanding through a
   "flipped" classroom. 

A course need not, and often is not, taught using only one of these
methods. Synergies between methods can be overlooked for the moment,
however, in the interests of understanding the characteristics of each
approach. 

In terms of sequentiality we can see these on a spectrum. The
traditional lecture course is highly sequential. Any non-linear
components rely on (i) the lecturer performing recaps, and (ii) the
students' memories. A powerpoint presentation is similar, but it is
much easier to jump from slide to slide to revisit topics. Slides as
an aide-memoire to both lecturer and student remove some of the burden
of note-taking and the short-term memory requirements to understand
material at the time it is presented. A textbook is further away from
pure sequentiality: though it presents its material sequentially, it
is common to provide in-text tools (reference, tables of contents,
indexes etc.) to allow easy (non-linear) transitions between important
sections of material. In this sense, electronic versions of text books
provide new opportunities and new challenges. It is practical and
powerful to embed "hyper" links into a documents, and many e-book
formats support this (e.g., the PDF standard). However, none of these
(in my experience) match the use of paper bookmarks, and page
flipping. However, as technology improves, electronic texts may become
the preferred approach not just because of the saved cost and
environmental benefits over hard copies. Finally, active learning
approaches can be the least linear. A student may pick and choose
their own path within the advice and constraints provided by their
teacher. 
 
At this point let us note that sequentiality is neutral. We make no
claim that it is inherently good or bad to be more or less
sequential. Only that one should understand the nature or
sequentiality and the impacts it has on the experience of the student.

In terms of pacing, we once again see a natural
spectrum. Chalk-and-talk is paced by the lecturer, and students have
little recourse (even video lectures are hard to slow or speed in
useful ways). Slides can be (upon later review) slowed or sped
through, even if the initial presentation is at the lecturers pace. A
textbook may be read at leisure, and active research likewise
performed at the student's own pace. 

Again, pacing is neutral. Forcing a student to the lecturers pace has
a downside: students may not keep up, or miss subtleties, but also
upsides: student's are forced to a discipline. That discipline is
often underrated in studies of active learning. Indeed active learning
can improve understanding and memory of a topic, but only if a student
engages in the material. Forced pacing forces
(pseudo-)engagement. Students who participate in active learning may
learn better, but it would be easy to hide a wealth of flaws in
teaching in the students who do not complete their course of study.

It may seem wishy-washy to refuse to place value on different
approaches. It would be understandable for the reader to revolt in
opposition to a failure to state: thou shalt do X. However, we intend
to dig deeper into these issues with the aim to at least highlight the
complex issues around the choice of method and we refuse the
idea that a single approach can be all-encompassing. We will continue
the discussion of issues through a metaphor. 

## The Metaphor 

We have at our disposal many forms of media use to convey sequential
narratives (stories) to an audience. The aim of these goes beyond
informing the audience to entertainment of that audience, however,
underlying almost all story telling is the need to engage with the
audience. Hence the desire to entertain as well as teach should not
distract from the wealth of understanding to be gained from the
experience of story tellers.

Indeed, good teachers are all story-tellers. The story they are
telling is a journey from ignorance to the understanding, but it is
never-the-less a story. 

Story-telling expanded dramatically in the 20th century thanks to a
number of technological revolutions. Most obviously film and
television developed from nascent ideas into full-fledged
industries. However a number of other media flowered as well.

It seems less high-profile than the development of movies, but the
printing also grew tremendously in popularity in this era. The
wide-spread expansion of literacy coupled with reduction in
publication costs lead to massive increases in the number and variety
of published books. The death of print is oft lamented since the rise
of the Internet, but in actuality, written work is still on the
rise. ????

Within the print world we focus on two types of media: the novel and
the comic book (or just comics). The novel will be familiar to most
readers, but comics have been so marginalised as an art form that many
academics do not consider the medium with the seriousness it
deserves. 


  -- on comics


Finally, let us add the WWW. This is not a single media as such, but
expresses the non-linear web of knowledge in the purest form we have
yet accomplished. 

How do these media relate to the topic of this commentary: simply we
wish to make the analogy that 

chalk-and-talk = movie or TV series
powerpoint = comics
textbooks = novels
active learning = the web

The latter two analogies should not be surprising at this point,
though there are subtleties. It is common in modern novels to use
non-linear time (e.g., flashbacks) to create interest, and this is
less common in textbooks. And equating active learning to the web is
somewhat facile: perhaps a guided tour of the web is a better analogy?

The former two analogies, however, we where we might spend more time
today. A lecture is like a movie in many ways. The pacing is
determined by the narrative's constructor, and any recaps or reminders
are provided only at their discretion. Otherwise the student/audience
member's understanding is limited by their ability to simultaneously
keep up and remember what has happened. 

A TV series might be a better analogy than a movie: in these the
material is broken into time-delineated chunks, with periodic recaps
and "season finals" or capstones.

A powerpoint lecture, on the other hand, while it is being presented
is much like a chalk-and-talk lecture, but it has the facility that it
is (usually) provided a set of sequential images (including text) much
as in a comic strip. In this form, it has many of the properties of a
comic (of not always the art or style). Indeed comics have been
labelled "sequential art" by luminaries such as Eisener. 





## Commentary

The medium is the message

Susan Sontag

On understanding comics 


MUitple points of view give NEW means to look 


Is this new -- I think not -- but it isn't a respectable point of
view. 

## Challenges and attacks

The challenge of the comic is that it is rare for one person to be
good at everything. Though we prefer not to call a comic a hybrid, its
creation still requires two skill sets. For that reason, many comics
have (at least) two creators. One is usually a visual artists,
responsible for the drawings; the other is a writer; responsible for
the script (the plot and dialogue). The two must share skills and
language to communicate well, and though a writer might be a capable
artist in their own right or visa versa, they don't have to be as
original and fluent in the others' skill set. 

In fact, many comics have more detailed specialisations: often the art
is broken into pencil sketches, then inks, and then colourised. This
is partially a production-line mentality (comics have sometimes been
produced in a less-than-glorious manner) but partially it reflects
that even relatively small details such as the choice of colours can
be a fine art just by itself.

So how is a lecturer, who is neither specialist writer, nor artist
meant to do all this? The answer is that, more and more, I expect
teams of professionals to take over teaching. It already happens in
the production of (large run) text books. MOOCs already employ groups
to produce a course. Podcasts employ a group to produce and edit their
work. Why should a single academic write, produce and present
course materials? It's the standard university model but it is at best
inefficient to pay professors to do things they aren't particularly
good at, and it is at worst leading to poor educational standards.

I don't suggest replacing professors. The high standards universities
aim for are created by having people at the top of their field leading
the design and implementation of courses. But why not have them lead a
team. Why not have (in a university department) a professional copy
editor, and a graphic designer, and professional presenter whose jobs
are to help produce and teach a range of courses across a whole group
of teachers.

The reason it doesn't happen (at least not wholesale) is that
university's are deeply wedded to their past. They hold tight to "Tom
Brown's School Days" and the ideas of inspiring personal teachers,
even though it is far from the days where (i) students had much direct
contact with these supposed mentors, (ii) classes were small enough
for any one teacher to make a differences, and (iii) lecturers
themselves were inspiring except in a tiny minority. 

We are locked into a Harry Potter universe where we expect and hope
that individual lecturers will step up to the plate and be our own
personal Dumbledors.

We know it doesn't work, and probably never did. 

The major change now? University teaching is under threat. MOOCs were
the first wave, and largely left universities untouched because bricks
and mortar still wins hearts and minds apparently. But what happens
when Amazon or Google decide they will enter the education market and
do it properly?  University's that don't take adapt won't have a
chance. And this is the easiest set of possible steps to take. 


