
It is brilliant and errudite, an unpicking of the social nature and
meaning of photography. It is rambling, and chaotic. It flits from
topic to topic with a complex underlying narrative that is at best
hard to follow and at worst utterly confusing. It requires knowledge
of art and poetry, of sociology and history, and of photography and
photographers that I don't have. And it is built from pages of prose
so dense it would embarrass a lead-lined coffin, mixed with statements
so pithy and clear as to shame crystal and that I long to memorise and
quote at parties.  

I can read a page of it for a day. I am not sure I will ever stop
reading it. I think it is the best book on photography.

It is bitterly critical of people I don't know in a way that makes me
want to see their photographs just so that I can understand why she
felt the need to exscortiate their middle-class limitations for 20
pages. She must love some of the subjects she examines to understand
them so well, but she doesn't shy away from exposing them to arc
lights. 

It is, definitively, the source that cements photography as a high
art, not the mere mimetic craft. So many early photographers were
outsiders from the art community; considered mere technicians as
opposed to creative geniuses. This book cuts deeply into those
boundaries and shows how naive it is to raise painting above its more
direct cousin simply because the knowledge and skill, and the leasure
to practice both, preclude access to painting for the multitude. An
art that allows anyone to participate is not diluted by its millions
of particpants. It is all the harder for an artist to achieve against
competition than in a niche-ified field that defends itself by its own
abstruse and hermetic requirements.

It is more a work of sociology and philosophy than a critique of photography.

And what is most important is that although it was written in the 70s,
when despite the enourmouse improvements in the technology and
economics of cameras and film, photography was still province
primarily of professionals, the middle classes, and the Japanese
tourist, it is still relevant today when one third or all living
humans have a smart phone and use their attached camera almost daily.
The instamatic had brought photography to the masses in the 70s and
Polaroid made the cycle of film development redundant, but masses
meant those who had the dual luxuries of time and spare income. Now
photography and self-documentation has become so common as to be
banal, and yet Sontag's commentary is almost doubly relevant.

It is a book about photography with no photographs.  It doesn't even
provide the banal and superficial descriptions that I am now so
familiar with that their absence is refreshing.  It does not
condescned. It expects us to be educated in the subject matter. 



